
\cleardoublepage

\addcontentsline{toc}{chapter}{Acknowledgements}

\begin{acknowledgements}

The one thing that I've learned the most during my time at Haverford and in my
writing of this thesis is that very little of our accomplishments belong to
ourselves. I am indebted to so many people who have done so much prior work in
the field I find myself in and to the plethora of people who've mentored me over
the past year. 

To Edwin Brady, the creator of the Idris, thank you for making dependently-typed
programming accessible. \textit{Type Driven Development} was instrumental in
leading me into this field and I would highly recommend it as a read to anyone
with an interest in dependently-typed programming. 

To Nicolas Oury, Wouter Swierstra, Adam Gundry, and so many great scholars
who have done work on what practical applications of dependently-typed
programming look like, thank you for guiding me into this field. I am so
indebted to the body of work that you have produced. 

To the board and the community at the Pan-Asian Resource Center, my teammates on
the Men's Rugby Team, the people I sing with in Chaverim and so many other
community members who have offered me the support spaces to learn and grow,
thank you. A special thanks to Rebecca, who has been an endless source of
support and accountability even from Peru. Haverford has shaken the very
foundations of my worldview to the ground and rebuilt them for the better. While
I have too many people to thank for that, these people deserve a special
mention. 

When I first visited Haverford 4 years ago, I met Dave Wonnacott, who introduced
me to the Haverford Computer Science Department. I was struck by how accessible
he felt as a professor and how down-to-earth and kind he was. Dave is actually a
big part of why I chose to come to Haverford. Since then, I have found a home in
Haverford's small and fledgling Computer Science department. Steven Lindell has
run a fantastic Senior Seminar and has offered support and guidance throughout
the year. In addition, to the faculty who have taught me, Sorelle, Jane, Jean,
Siddharth, JD, thank you. 

To my advisor, Richard Eisenberg, I have inexpressible gratitude. Richard
introduced me to advanced functional programming and sparked my interest in this
field. Throughout this whole year, he has been an endless source of support and
mentorship. When I fail to understand a concept, I had the confidence that I
could walk into our weekly meetings, express my utter confusion and work through
that with him. Richard has a relentless attention to detail and a sharp mind and
he is usually able to instantaneously offer improvements to an idea that I've
been pondering over for a whole week. For students looking for a thesis advisor
who will seriously optimize around your learning and growth and challenge you to
express your ideas with clarity, you cannot go wrong with Richard. Richard, from
the bottom of my heart, thank you. 

Decades ago, two university students sat on the grass next to the airport on a
little green island ruled by a brutal martial law. They watched planes take off
and they dreamt of leaving the island and searching for a world where
free-spirited characters could live happily. Those people were my parents, Misha
Fang-Chih Chou and Kenny Ghen-Yue Liao, to whom I am struggling to fathom the
words to even begin to thank. They immigrated for no other reason than the
pursuit of happiness. My entire life, they have always optimized not around my
success, but around what makes me happy. They have taught me that to live a
fulfilling life is not only about the relentless pursuit of milestones, but
about being content at the end of the day. 

I'm looking back at the choices I've made. I think I'm happy. I think I'm
content. 

Kevin Jiah-Chih Liao\\
April 2018

\end{acknowledgements}
